Microsoft's co-founder Bill Gates
publishing a new essay on climate. It's
aimed at to deliver a message ahead of
COP 30 and he's suggesting that the
climate community should shift its
strategy from temperature and emission
targets to the impact on human lives. An
exclusive interview on that topic. I
also asked him if he is worried about
whether we are in an AI bubble. Here's
what he had to say.
We need to define bubble. If if what we
mean is like tulips in the Netherlands
that they eventually look back and said,
"What the heck? There was nothing there.
Those were just tulips." No, that's not
where we are. If you mean it's like the
internet bubble where in the end
something very profound happened. The
world was very different. Some companies
succeeded, but a lot of the companies
were kind of mean to fell behind uh
burning capital companies. Absolutely,
there are a ton of these investments
um
that will be dead ends. And you look at
all the investments that are being made
today by some of the big tech companies.
Some companies were not making money on
AI yet, but are making massive
commitments to chip makers and data
centers and say this math makes sense.
Um
the AI is the biggest
technical thing
ever in my lifetime. I mean it is so
profound and therefore it's influence is
hard to overstate. And the economic
value, this is basically intelligence.
Uh you know, where you can get medical
advice, so you can get a tutor, or you
can get somebody to help you design
drugs. So, the value is extremely high.
Uh just like creating the internet ended
up being in that very, very valuable.
But you have a frenzy and you know, some
of these companies will be glad they
spent all this money. Some of them, you
know, they'll commit to data centers
that whose electricity's is too
expensive, you know, that it could be
done overseas. Or they'll buy a
generation of chips and and you know,
they won't have captured all their value
before the next uh one comes along. But
you know, if you want to be a tech
company, you don't get to say no.
Uh
you know, let's check out of this race.
>> you think the public appetite for this
is ultimately going to be? And I I ask
because I think there's concerns about
two things that are happening right now.
One is energy costs. So, there's a whole
bunch of places where people want to put
data centers and uh you know, the
community says, "No, we don't want this
because of we don't want to have to
spend more money for power to power our
own homes." At the same time they're
worried that if they actually are
successful, they'll also lose their
jobs. We need to put things like
TerraPower nuclear reactors in places
where it's very clear that you're not
raising the the residents' electricity
bills because that's being put in there.
Historically, nuclear was done in a way
that the utility bore a lot of that
liability. That that business model
won't get repeated. So, we need to make
sure
uh
to pick locations where the economics
and the political acceptance is very,
very strong. We have We don't have
permission to drive up people's
electricity's costs. Uh you know, in
terms of the jobs, this is going to take
some period of time. But yes,
uh
although it hasn't been seen in large
numbers, over the next several years,
there will be some impact on the job
market. Nowadays, when you say that,
some people are like, "Oh, how can you
you know,
you know, say that? Isn't that going to
slow the US down in this race?" But it's
only honest for people um
to speak frankly about the fact this
will have a big effect on the job
market.
And of course uh Gates is a long-time
capitalist, so I talked to him about the
industrial policy coming from the White
House including the US taking stakes in
rare earth and chip companies. Here's
what he had to say.
The government
operates best when it's kind of
predictable. That is when you know what
you know, what are the tariffs going to
be for the next 20 years? Because when
you build a a factory,
uh so the government shouldn't be
changing its policy, you know, every
year or every day. Uh because you know,
predictability is a very, very important
thing. Understanding
when the company's helping nascent
technology
is it um doing that for the good of the
country and you know, not and treating
companies equally, or will it want to
own part of those companies and not and
if somebody has better technology,
they'll favor the company they own part
of. You know, we need to understand what
those policies are. Yes, I think there's
a rush of people to say, "Wow,
uh you know, maybe that's how to you
know, get to the front of the line for
government money." But the rules of the
game we're playing are pretty unclear
right now.